For most people, a sponge-shaped cloud means an exploded atomic bomb,
threat of radioactive contamination
and surely mutual destruction and end of the world.
But this is not a must.
Any large explosion would create a mushroom cloud.
And this has happened in the UK - right here.
Instead of this crater, KCF Fold was an old mine,
turned into an underground garrison of the Royal Air Force.
Keeping ammunition should be safer -
One problem with ordinary warehouses is that the enemy
you just have to hit them with a bomb and everything explodes.
This mine seemed perfect, but there was one problem.
Since it was built in the 1930s for small bombs,
such as can be worn by a person,
as they can travel by conveyor belt,
whatever soldiers can shoot from the gauntlets over the trenches.
That's why these old quarries with all their tunnels were perfect.
But during the Second World War
bombing becomes work of the Air Force,
and bombs are getting bigger and bigger faster - half a ton, one ton, two tons.
And for the war, they needed many, many more bombs than they thought from the beginning.
Rapid changes in demand and supply led to underground warehouses
to be filled far beyond their capacity.
By the end of 1944 here in KSF Fold there were piles of highly incendiary bombs
outside the mine until they find a place inside.
There was a war.
They had to do what they could.
Monday, 27th November 1944.
The Chief Officer was on leave.
The officer responsible for the underground warehouse was also on leave -
and his deputy.
Every boss in the warehouse was inexperienced and extremely overloaded.
According to an official investigation
someone tried to remove a detonator from an active brass chisel.
And brass chisels cause sparks.
In Morocco, 2400 km from here, something like a distant earthquake is detected.
160 km from here people heard rumble.
At 6 km from here a shock wave broke windows.
And here, a sponge-shaped cloud rose in the sky.
4,000 tons of bomb exploded in a terrible chain reaction -
Britain's largest explosion in history.
In place of this crater there was once a hill with a farmhouse on the top.
There is no sign of the house and the people who lived there.
The bombs, which did not explode immediately, blew into the air
and attacked in a circle of miles along with millions of tons of debris.
A nearby dam wall collapsed, flooding factories and houses in the nearby valley.
The exact number of victims is not known - at least 60, maybe 90.
It took months to find the bodies of the dead and some were never discovered.
And in the Air Force reports, classified for many years after the explosion,
along with the names of the victims and page after page
detailed descriptions of the damage, this phrase stands:
"Columns of black smoke and debris rose in the form of a huge sponge."
When hurrying when inexperienced, everyone can feel self-conscious,
to do something casual, to make a mistake.
Even when working with explosives.
After many years, the crater is clear; decades later
what's left is just a scar in the landscape.
About half of the bombs actually survived the explosion
and, although removed, there are still tunnels and storage facilities under the crater.
But as travelers have begun to damage the site,
all known entrances were filled.
And knowing that there are still unexploded bombs in the crater,
I will not skip this fence.
But there is an interesting detail
right at the end of history.
In the late 1940s and 1950s,
American military monsters for recordings and details of the explosion.
How big was it exactly?
What were the damage to the surrounding earth and whether it was due to the earthquake or the blast wave?
What happens if you detonate
something with the size of an atomic bomb underground?
Britain did not respond.
And America returned to making its own mushrooming clouds.
Translation: WG